//still need to add tempo range, musicians, song examples, sound system, acquisition, organization, bpm

Hawaii Jitterbugs DJ Guidlines

Introduction
This document is intended to be a set of basic guidelines for those who are interested in developing their skills as a DJ for swing dancing in our local scene (Honolulu).  As such, it is limited in its scope.  It is not meant to be a strict set of rules, nor to stifle anyone’s individual approach to selecting and playing music.  It is our hope that these guidelines will help novices in their efforts to begin exploring swing music.

Music Selection

Genre of Music
In the context of a swing dance, the music must have swung rhythms.  To get a sense of what this means, it may be helpful to listen to some of the song examples and musicians listed below.  Music should be primarily, but not necessarily entirely, big band swing music from the 30s and 40s.  Gypsy Jazz, Blues, and contemporary Jazz are not harshly discouraged, but should be played sparingly.  Genres such as Pop, Latin, Soul, Funk, etc… should not be played.

Compiling a playlist
When compiling a playlist, it is helpful to select many more songs than you will strictly need for the allotted time.  This is so that you can substitute songs as the need arises.  Be sure to include a variety of tempos and energy levels, and to consider the mood you’ll set with your selections.  

Consider how each song flows from the one before and into the one after it, and don’t play a song that you haven’t listened to all the way through.

If you’re just getting started familiarizing yourself with the music, you might start with a smaller playlist.  As your facility with selecting songs increases, you may feel more comfortable with a larger playlist or with selecting songs directly from your library.

Establishing Goals
Establishing goals prior to playing your set will help to guide you throughout the process, and to evaluate how well you’ve done when it’s over.  Getting as many dancing as often as possible is an admirable goal, but should not exist in isolation.  Consider, for example, the following questions, and how the answers might affect your goals.

What time is your set (beginning, middle, or end of the night)?
How far do you want to push the dancers (with tempo, duration, complexity, etc…)?
How do you want the energy level to progress throughout your set?
How will you make changes to your set list if things don’t go as planned?

Running the Dance

Watching/Reading the floor

As a DJ, it is important to maintain an active role throughout your set.  You should always be watching the floor, and making whatever changes you feel will benefit the dance.  Consider the following questions.

How many couples are dancing?
How do people react to your song selection?
Who specifically is or is not dancing (beginners, advanced dancers, etc…)?
What style are people dancing (lindy, balboa, charleston, etc…)?
What is the energy level or mood of the room?
How can you affect or accommodate the above conditions?

Other considerations when running the dance

Breaks between songs should ideally be intentionally managed.  In other words, it is not always prudent to let music software simply autoplay the next track.  Starting songs exactly when you mean to will allow for more flexibility in changing your song line-up, affording dancers time to find another partner, etc.  

Breaks for announcements should be delivered enthusiastically, but kept short and to the point.  Do not allow announcements to go on so long that the energy of the dance is extinguished.  If details regarding the content can be found elsewhere (Facebook, website, etc…), keep the announcements general and direct people there.

Keep at least two or three songs, ideally at a mid-range tempo, set aside for birthday/out of town jams.  If you have a jam, have only one which includes everyone.

Keep a playlist of popular line dance songs, but be careful only to play them when the associated line dance is intended to result.  Playing such a song could inadvertently trigger a line dance.  Listed below are some popular line dances and the songs associated with them.

Franky Manning Shim Sham (T’aint What You Do, Tuxedo Junction, Shim Sham Song)
Dean Collins Shim Sham (Back Bay Shuffle)
Tranky Doo (The Dipsy Doodle)

Be open and ready to accommodate requests, as long as they adhere to the general music guidelines.  This is important, as people getting a chance to dance to their favorite songs can have a very positive effect on the room.  Think about how a requested song will fit with what you’ve planned, and try not to disrupt the flow of your set list when adding it in.  

Evaluation/improvement

Examine whether you’ve accomplished your goals.  It may help to write them down beforehand, and to keep notes during your set to see what changes you had to make.  Get feedback from dancers.  You can ask them directly, or put out an anonymous comment box.  Do whatever you’re most comfortable with, but make sure to do something.